# MODEL1107050000: Bialik2010_Apoptosis_SPIKEmodel

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL1107050000.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL1107050000.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This model is from the article:  
**Systems biology analysis of programmed cell death**   
Shani Bialik, Einat Zalckvar, Yaara Ber, Assaf D. Rubinstein, Adi Kimchi
_Trends in Biochemical Sciences_ Volume 35, Issue 10, 556-564, 27 May 2010
[20537543](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20537543) ,  
**Abstract:**   
Systems biology, a combined computational and experimental approach to
analyzing complex biological systems, has recently been applied to
understanding the pathways that regulate programmed cell death. This approach
has become especially crucial because recent advances have resulted in an
expanded view of the network, to include not just a single death module
(apoptosis) but multiple death programs, including programmed necrosis and
autophagic cell death. Current research directions in the systems biology
field range from quantitative analysis of subprocesses of individual death
pathways to the study of interconnectivity among the various death modules of
the larger network. These initial studies have provided great advances in our
understanding of programmed cell death and have important clinical
implications for drug target research.

**Brief Note about the model:** This model is an export of 26 [SPIKE](http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/~spike/) Apoptosis Networks to SBML format. This is a pathway model (not quantitative model) of Apoptosis. 

Apoptosis, or type I cell death, is a form of programmed cell death
characterized by fragmentation of the cytoplasm and nucleus, chromatin
condensation and fragmentation, cytoskeletal collapse, membrane blebbing, and
finally, disintegration of the cell into apoptotic bodies, which are engulfed
by adjacent cells, thereby avoiding an inflammatory response. It serves to
model tissues during embryonic development, to regulate cell number by
eliminating excess cells, and to remove damaged, mutated or infected cells.
Defective or excessive apoptosis can lead to cancer or autoimmune and
degenerative diseases, respectively. Apoptosis is executed by a family of
cysteine proteases, the caspases, which function in a proteolytic cascade that
is initiated by either the intrinsic mitochondrial-based pathway leading to
apoptosome formation, or the extrinsic pathway, which involves activation of
death receptors by their extracellular ligands to form the DISC. The most
distal caspases, known as the executioner caspases, cleave numerous cellular
substrates, thereby leading to specific dismantling of the cell. Apoptosis is
regulated by multiple proteins at several levels, including the Bcl-2 family,
which regulate the release of apoptogenic factors from the mitochondria, and
the IAP family, which regulate caspase activity, and is countered by survival
signals eminating from the NF-kB signaling pathway. Although most of the
regulation occurs at the post-translational level, involving protein-protein
interactions, proteolysis, changes in subcellular localization and
phosphorylation, transcriptional control, such as by p53, can also modulate
the expression levels of several key apoptotic proteins.

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not. .  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


